Updating documentation around deploy markers (#9359)
circleci/circleci-docs: jekyll/_cci2/deploy/configure-deploy-markers.adoc

----

In the example

** The `environment-name` parameter sets the target environment. If said environment doesn't exist, it will be created.
** The `component-name` parameter sets the name that will be displayed in the CircleCI UI.
** The `namespace` parameter is optional and can be provided to use a value other than `default`.

If you are deploying multiple components or to multiple environments from a single workflow, you will have to provide the command with a deployment name.
This identifies the deployment your are planning so that you can later on reference it to update its status.
This can be done as shown below:

[,yml]
----
jobs:
  deploy-my-service:
    executor: some-executor
    steps:
      - run: circleci run release plan <deploy-name> --environment-name=<some-environment-name> --component-name<=>some-component-name> --target-version=<some-version-name>
----

In the example the positional argument `deploy-name` is the arbitrary value that will be used to identify the deployment and should be unique within the workflow.

> If not specified the deployment name will be set to `default`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If not specified, the deployment name will be set to `default`.
```

=== 1.2. Update the deploy status

After deploying your application, you can update the status of the deployment to `RUNNING` by running the `circleci run release update` command in a new step.

[,yml]
----
circleci run release update --status=running
----

If you are deploying multiple components or to multiple environments from a single workflow, you will have to provide the command with a deployment name.
This value should match the value you provided when you planned the deploy.

[,yml]
----
circleci run release update <deploy-name> --status=running
----

> Now you can add `on_success` and `on_failure` steps at the end of your deployment job, to handle the final status update of the deploy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can use the `when` attribute to add `on_success` and `on_failure` steps at the end of your deployment job, to handle the final status update of the deploy.
```

> pass:[<!-- vale off -->]

Reviewer: What was failing to mean you needed to bypass the linter? Just wondering because it should skip code blocks by default anyway 🤔

Author: you are right, I forgot to take this out. If I recall something in the formatting was messing up the code block. I will remove it.

[,yml]
----
- run:
    name: Update planned release to SUCCESS
    command: |
      circleci run release update \
        --status=SUCCESS  
    when: on_success 
- run:
    name: Update planned release to FAILED
    command: |
      if [ -f failure_reason.env ]; then
        source failure_reason.env
      fi
      circleci run release update \
        --status=FAILED \
        --failure-reason="$FAILURE_REASON"
    when: on_fail 
----
pass:[<!-- vale on -->]

This will update the status of the deploy to `SUCCESS` or `FAILED` depending on the outcome of your job.
In this example, the `failure_reason.env` file can be created by a previous step in the job. This can be done, for example, in a step in which we are validating the status of the deployment.
You can do that as shown below:

[,yml]
----
echo "FAILURE_REASON='Deployment was not found'" > failure_reason.env
----

=== 1.3 Update the deploy status to canceled

If you want to update your deployment to canceled when the deploy job is canceled, you can do so by adding the following job to your configuration.

[,yml]
----

> cancel-deploy:

Reviewer: I think it's helpful for readers if you expand examples like this to the top level yaml key (that might not be the right way to phrase that but...) so include `jobs:`

  executor: go  
  steps:                 
    - run:
        name: Update planned release to CANCELED
        command: |
          circleci run release update \
            --status=CANCELED         
----

Then you can add it to your workflow as shown below.

[,yml]
----

> - cancel-deploy:

Reviewer: And here add the rest of the workflow maybe?

    context:
      - dockerhub-readonly
    requires:
      - deploy:
        - canceled
----

This will make it sot that the job will be run only when the `deploy` job is canceled, thus updating the deployment to the `canceled` status.

> === 1.3. Full config example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== 1.4. Full config example
```

          command: <your-deployment-logic>
      - run:
          name: Update planned deployment to running
          command: circleci run release update --status=running
      - run:
          name: Validate deployment
          command: <your-validation-logic>
      - run:
          name: Update planned deployment to SUCCESS
          command: |
            circleci run release update \
              --status=SUCCESS  
          when: on_success 
      - run:
          name: Update planned deployment to FAILED
          command: |
            if [ -f failure_reason.env ]; then
              source failure_reason.env
            fi
            circleci run release update \
              --status=FAILED \
              --failure-reason="$FAILURE_REASON"
          when: on_fail       
  cancel-deploy:
    executor: go  
    steps:                 
      - run:
          name: Update planned release to CANCELED
          command: |
            circleci run release update \
              --status=CANCELED     
workflows:
  deploy-workflow:
    jobs:
      - deploy
      - cancel-deploy:
          requires:
            - deploy:
              - canceled 
----

== 2. Deploy logs

> Sometimes you might not want your deployment marker to have any specific status, but you are perfectly content with it just being logged in the deploys UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you might not want your deployment marker to have any specific status, but still want it to be logged in the deploys UI.
```

* A CircleCI account connected to your code. You can link:https://circleci.com/signup/[sign up for free].
* A CircleCI project with a workflow configured to deploy your code.

== 1. Update the configuration

To create a deployment marker, you will have to update your CircleCI configuration file.
You will have to add commands to plan a deploy and then update its status based on the outcome of your deployment script.

=== 1.1. Plan a deploy

Add a `circleci run release plan` command to your deployment job. This tells CircleCI to plan a new deploy and show it in the deploys UI with `pending` status.

> In order to do this you can just add a `plan deploy` step at the start of your _deployment_ job, for example:

Reviewer 2: `plan deploy` step is confusing IMO. We can just remove this line I think

[,yml]
----
jobs:
  deploy-my-service:
    executor: some-executor
    steps:
      - run: circleci run release plan --target-version=<some-version-name>
----

Where `target-version` parameter should match the name of the version being deployed.

> This will create a new deploy with pending status, visible in the CircleCI UI.

Reviewer 2: suggestion: Maybe we can link to https://app.circleci.com/deploys ?

> If you don't already have an Environment in your Organization a new one will be created with the name `default`. This will be set as the target for this deploy.

Reviewer 2: Should we link to the `Manage Environments` section below?

If you don't already have a Component in your Project a new one will be created with the name of the project. This will be set as the component that is being deployed.

If you have multiple environments and components you will have to specify their names manually.

This can be done as shown below:

** The `target-version` parameter should match the name of the version being deployed.

> ** The `deploy-name` parameter is just an identifier of this deploy. It is needed to keep track of multiple deployment in a single workflow.

Reviewer 2: I think we are not specifying the deploy-name in the below example

** (Optional) You can provide the following parameter if required:
*** The `namespace` parameter can be provided to use a value other than `default`.

[,yml]
----
jobs:
  deploy-my-service:
    executor: some-executor
    steps:

>       - run: circleci run release plan --environment-name=some-environment-name --component-name=some-component-name --target-version=<some-version-name>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - run: circleci run release plan --environment-name=<some-environment-name> --component-name=<some-component-name> --target-version=<some-version-name>
```

          command: <your-deployment-logic>
      - run:
          name: Update planned deployment to running
          command: circleci run release update --status=running
      - run:
          name: Validate deployment
          command: <your-validation-logic>
      - run:
          name: Update planned deployment to SUCCESS
          command: |
            circleci run release update \
              --status=SUCCESS  
          when: on_success 
      - run:
          name: Update planned deployment to FAILED
          command: |
            if [ -f failure_reason.env ]; then
              source failure_reason.env
            fi
            circleci run release update \
              --status=FAILED \
              --failure-reason="$FAILURE_REASON"
          when: on_fail       
  cancel-deploy:
    executor: go  
    steps:                 
      - run:
          name: Update planned release to CANCELED
          command: |
            circleci run release update \
              --status=CANCELED     
workflows:
  deploy-workflow:
    jobs:
      - deploy
      - cancel-deploy:
          requires:
            - deploy:
              - canceled 
----

== 2. Deploy logs

> Sometimes you might not want your deployment marker to have any specific status, ut you are perfectly content with it just being logged in the deploys UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes you might not want your deployment marker to have any specific status, but you are perfectly content with it just being logged in the deploys UI.
```

* A CircleCI account connected to your code. You can link:https://circleci.com/signup/[sign up for free].
* A CircleCI project with a workflow configured to deploy your code.

== 1. Update the configuration

> To create a deployment marker, you will have to update your CircleCI configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a deployment marker, you will update your CircleCI configuration file.
```

> You will have to add commands to plan a deploy and then update its status based on the outcome of your deployment script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will add commands to plan a deploy and then update its status based on the outcome of your deployment script.
```

[,yml]
----
jobs:
  deploy-my-service:
    executor: some-executor
    steps:
      ...
      (existing deployment commands)
      ...
      - run:
          name: Update planned release to SUCCESS
          command: |
            circleci run release update \
              --status=SUCCESS  
          when: on_success 
      - run:
          name: Update planned release to FAILED
          command: |
            if [ -f failure_reason.env ]; then
              source failure_reason.env
            fi
            circleci run release update \
              --status=FAILED \
              --failure-reason="$FAILURE_REASON"
          when: on_fail 
----

This will update the status of the deploy to `SUCCESS` or `FAILED` depending on the outcome of your job.
In this example, the `failure_reason.env` file can be created by a previous step in the job. This can be done, for example, in a step in which we are validating the status of the deployment.
You can do that as shown below:

[,yml]
----
echo "FAILURE_REASON='Deployment was not found'" > failure_reason.env
----

=== 1.3 Update the deploy status to canceled

> If you want to update your deployment to canceled when the deploy job is canceled, you can do so by adding the following job to your configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to update your deployment to `canceled` when the deploy job is canceled, you can do so by adding the following job to your configuration.
```

      ...
      (existing deployment commands)
      ...
      - run: circleci run release log --target-version=<some-version-name>
----

> This command supports the same optional parameters as the `release plan` command, but doesn't require a `deploy-name`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command supports the same optional parameters as the `release plan` command, but does not require a `deploy-name`.
```

> You can see an example of the command with all optional parameters in the example below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see an example of the command with all optional parameters in the following example:
```

Author: Would you be ok with changing this to "You can see the command with all optional parameters in the following example:" to avoid the repetition of example?

Reviewer: Oh yes definitely!

[,yml]
----
jobs:
  deploy-my-service:
    executor: some-executor
    steps:
      ...
      (existing deployment commands)
      ...
      - run: circleci run release log --environment-name=<some-environment-name> --component-name=<some-component-name> --target-version=<some-version-name>
----

> ** The `environment-name` specifies the target environment. If said environment doesn't exist, it will be created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** The `environment-name` specifies the target environment. If the environment does not exist, it will be created.
```

----

This command supports the same optional parameters as the `release plan` command, but doesn't require a `deploy-name`.
You can see an example of the command with all optional parameters in the example below.

[,yml]
----
jobs:
  deploy-my-service:
    executor: some-executor
    steps:
      ...
      (existing deployment commands)
      ...
      - run: circleci run release log --environment-name=<some-environment-name> --component-name=<some-component-name> --target-version=<some-version-name>
----

** The `environment-name` specifies the target environment. If said environment doesn't exist, it will be created.
** The `component-name` parameter sets the name that will be displayed in the CircleCI UI.
** The `target-version` parameter should match the name of the version being deployed.
** (Optional) You can provide the following parameter if required:
*** The `namespace` parameter can be provided to use a value other than `default`.

== 3. Manage environments

Configuring deploy markers will automatically create an environment integration in the CircleCI deploys UI with the name you specified or with the `default` name if you didn't specify any.

> You can then use the CircleciUI to manage your environments, by creating, deleting or updating them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then use the CircleCI UI to manage your environments, by creating, deleting or updating them.
```

To manually create an environment integration, follow these steps:

. In the CircleCI web app, select **Deploys** in the sidebar.
. If this is your first environment setup, select btn:[Create your first Environment Integration]. If you already have environments set up, choose the **Environments** tab and select btn:[Create Environment Integration].
. Enter a name for your environment, and a description if you would like.

> . Use the dropdown menu to choose your environment integration type, then select btn:[Next: Release Agent Setup]. **You do not need to continue with installing a release agent at this point**, but you will need to reference this environment integration name as part of your config when adding the `log release` step below.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention they can choose type `Custom` when using release markers?
